 Today we're going to continue with another unit on the Six Yogas of Naropa.

And we're going to do some review. We've been working with a, with a technique that I've been calling intervention for Episodic Suffering, which is the 1-5-7 technique, which we'll review and we'll do it today. And as we're as we go forward, especially in the beginning, I want to give you a window into my process.

So this could be a, we're going to go meta a little bit here, meta one T because I think it will be relevant to you. This starts with the setup here is, is something that Bill Hamilton said to me about the different styles of presentation among the teachers. That some of the teachers he had seen. He said, for example the, some of the ims, the Inside Meditation Society teachers had a way of crafting a a d talk and then giving it over and over again.

And finally improving it over literally years until it was a polished jewel. Joseph Goldstein is a master of this. You can see the handwritten long hand notes that he's probably wrote 40 years ago, and he pulls it out and he delivers it in such a way that it's, it's not only it, it retains the, uh, original profundity of his thoughts, but but it's engaging.

It feels fresh cause he's a very good public speaker. And Bill compared and contrasted that with the famous Burmese Yogi Dipa Ma who taught at IMS too during the eighties. She had a completely different approach. She didn't prepare and she didn't bring notes. She would actually meditate before the session and, they just show up.

So that's the one I want to focus on right here. Uh, because I have adopted that as my style. By the time that, uh, any presentation starts, I usually have a theme. But I, I rarely use notes. I'll use 'em if I absolutely need to. And there's a leap of faith, and there's a big leap of faith here because after all, if I were to prepare and if I had the whole presentation outlined, I you can't really go wrong.

I could fall back on that. And that's a safety valve. But I deliberately don't put myself, I deliberately put myself in a a less secure position, and I just trust that something is going to show up. There will be a theme. In this case. In the case with this I get to present, every other week alternating with Vince.

Usually by the time the session starts, I have a pretty good idea of what the theme will be, in fact. So that has been the case every time. But it's not I sat down to craft a presentation. I'm trusting it to come to me. And I'm telling you, this can be nerve-wracking, especially the first few times you do it.

And it reminds me of a time when I was a musician playing a gig in Los Angeles. And one of the things that we would do, I was playing bass. We would read charts from , a music stand. You'd put the chart there and you didn't have to know the music because you'd read it. And one day, this band, this is a, a regular band, we got together, uh, often and played these gigs.

So we all knew each other. So we're playing the Girl from Ipanema, which is a very cool song, and I'm playing bass and I'm following the chart, and Richard Bowers, God love him, the drummer who's sitting right next to us, sitting on his drum thrown right next to me because it's a small stage. I'm just to his left.

He reaches over and he takes my chart off of the music stand and puts it over on the other side of him where I can't reach it. And I completely failed. I had not memorized the tune. I didn't know how to play it. I had been on dead record the whole time just looking at the chart for like several years.

This has been going on. The song was a disaster. The keyboard player tried to take over to play bass on the low of the piano, but it's not the same. Very humiliating. But I couldn't deny that it was a good joke. So I said to Richard, the drummer during the break, how could you do this to me?

And he told me a story. He said he was once on the road with a show band and um, he was reading his reading chart as a drummer and the band leader came up to him after one of the gigs. Gigs and he says, you're fired, Richard at me and fired. We're 2000 miles from home. This is the only gig I've got. And this guy says, you're reading Sarz.

You gotta know this material. So Richard went home, memorized all the material, and got to keep the gig.

The next time we played Girl From Ima, I had learned the song and I never had to read it again. But that leap of faith to go from reading charts to, trusting yourself to be able to do it, that's terrifying and worthwhile.

So in this case, I have a, I have an idea what the theme is today. I'm going to talk about the Six Yogas of Naropa, and we're going to warm up to it with some review of 1-5-7. And this completely dovetails with what I'm saying right now. In other words, we have tools. In this case, we have a very specific tool.

We're calling the 1-5-7 to get us in the mood if we're not already there. And I, I would like you to take another moment of meta reflection and notice how, how remarkable that is to have a reliable on demand tool to change your mood. Into something better or in Buddhist parlance to, to get out of the lower realms of suffering into either the Human or the God realm from which you might be in a better position to preach dharma.

Having said that, let's do this. Here's a, a quick review. What is the 1-5-7? It refer, it refers to minutes. So you spend one minute evaluating what realm am I in? Which of the Six Buddhist realms am I in? You spend five minutes preferably in a dyad with somebody else allowed, noting freestyle and you use the, there is setup, there is dryness.

I'm doing this in real time now. There's coolness, there is pressure, there's heaviness, and that five minutes is designed to. Lift you up if you were in a lower realm to begin with, of suffering to lift you up into the Human realm, which is, uh, on the clock base at 10 o'clock.

From there, from that platform of stability in the Human realm, it's not such a stretch to be reborn as a God. So then after we've done the five minutes of freestyle loading, we do seven minutes of essence loading, which I'll review the instructions for, and that's designed to get us into the God realm.

So if this works for all of us, first one thing is we're all going to feel better than we do now in about 13 minutes. And then secondly I'll be, uh, in especially a good position to talk about the new material for today. This is called Practice What You Preach. All right, so what is one? The one is we take a minute to evaluate what realm am I in?

And I like to use the clock face at 12 o'clock. Is the God realm, am I a God right now? Metaphorically, no, because God's never have a bad day. I'm feeling a little discomfort in the body and some aversion to that. That's totally not a God thing. All right, continuing clockwise. Two o'clock. Am I a fallen God?

A Jealous God, a Titan an well? Those creatures are characterized by their competitive competitiveness, their powerful manipulation, their insecurity, because I always have to prove it. I'm not really feeling that right now. I'm checking that off the list. I'm not a God, and I'm not a Titan if I continue around the clock face to.

Four. Am I an Animal? Animals are dull and reactive and they don't do a lot of high level cognitive processing. So the very fact that I can talk coherently about these Six Realms, I'm not an Animal. Okay. What about six o'clock? Am I in Hell? Yeah. Well, because Hell is where aversion happens. And if you think about the Buddhist formula, Lobha, Dosa, Moha, very important

formula in Buddhism. Lobha, Dosa, Moha, sometimes translated as Greed, Hatred, and Delusion. Well, that covers three of the realms. The Greed is the hungry ghost. It wants something. It doesn't have the Hatred, Fear, Aversion is the Hell realm, and delusion is the Animal realm. So you see how these various systems come together to reinforce each other.

You can remember the Six Realms, because three of them are just the three poisons. Am I a a Hell being? Yeah. because I'm, that's my main candidate at this point. Okay. What about eight o'clock? Could I be a hungry ghost? Am I longing for something I don't have? No, I often do, but that's not what's going on right now.

And then finally at 10 o'clock, am I a Human? A Human is unique in the breadth of its purview. A Human can be mindful and note carefully all across the spectrum of  pleasant, neutral, and unpleasant phenomena. That's not what I'm doing. So I took more than one minute there to talk it through with you,

but you can see that that could take 1 Okay, for the five, we're going to break into Diane's and if there's anybody here who has never done the 1-5-7, please raise your electronic hand, not your physical hand, because we might not see it. Go down to reactions and raise your hand if you have not done the 1-5-7. Okay, Peter and Phillip.

Alright, so, what I would request is that I get into a three person room with Phillip and Peter and everybody else is in a for five minutes. And the, the one, the five here. Is you're going to be on a timer, so you won't have to take care of that. We'll do it for five minutes. You're going to do there is set everything up with, there is freestyle loading, there is dryness, there is pressure, there is coolness, there is hearing.

All right. Let's break it out and do that and I'll teach this to them.

Okay. We're just back from the five, five minutes of there is freestyle noting the idea there was to to coax ourselves out of the lower realms if we're in them and into the Human realm to build a stable platform. Notice that this has to be very subtle because if you were to go, if you were to say, well, I want to get outta the lower realms.

Yeah. And in fact that's a goal within Buddhism, don't want to be reborn in the lower realms. Fair enough. But if I approach this with aversion, I hate being in this realm, and therefore I'm going to get myself out of it that you, it won't work because you will just further box yourself in to Hell in this case because you're aversive.

So we have to coax ourselves and that's why we're doing the noting. We're just saying exactly what is happening comprehensively. Now in my case, I actually do feel a little better. I think I succeeded in getting into stability as a Human, whereas before, I think I was in the Hell mode. Does anyone have any comments about the before and after in this case?

Did it work?

Vince? Yeah, it definitely worked. I felt this familiar sense as the practice went on that like my heart started to open a little bit and I was feeling gratitude. Love that. That for me is usually the indicator that this practice is working, that, uh, my heart starts to come online.

Okay. So I'm going to assume that this was largely successful and we'll go on to the next. All right. The seven is a very special kind of noting called Essence noting. It's different from freestyle loading because we have more of it, more filters here. There are three instructions. The first instruction is you say listening.

Listening is a primary object If you don't know what else to do, the correct answer is always listening. So give you, you want to keep the pace up while doing this exercise allowed with a partner. You don't wanna be frantic, but you don't want it to bog down either. So you gotta keep the pace. So you stay listening when you don't know what else to say.

But what are you listening for? You're listening for ships in a distant harbor.

The idea is that you're listening for something you know, you will not hear. This is important. So it, it fosters receptivity, infinite receptivity. I hear something, but it couldn't be the shits, because after all, I've deliberately listened for shits are too far away to hear. So you constantly reset and it keeps you open.

Listening, listening. Now, second instruction. If anything good happens, you're going to note it as a positive mind state. So you might say, receptivity, openness, interest, joy, love list. All good things are to be noted loud. But what if something bad happens? If something bad happens, you're going to do the quintessential God move, ignore it.

You're going to say release. This is the key hack. If you wanna be a God, you have to learn to ignore everything unpleasant. All right, that's, this is what we're doing. So no, no shame or shamelessly cultivating positive line states. Anything bad happens, all you say is release. You wait for your turnaround to come around again.

Do it again. Okay. We do have I think people who haven't actually done this, so I need to volunteer for just a couple of rounds of listening, noting with me so we can demonstrate it.

Jennifer,

if you unmute, we can do it. Listening.

Release. Joyful anticipation,

listening, calm opening, listening. Release. Release. Gratitude.

Optimism. Listening. Listening. Listening. Wellbeing, hope. Well, wishing

listening. Joy, kindness. Thanks, Jennifer. All right. So that's essence noting. It's designed to help us move into a God realm, however, temporarily it usually works. So don't be surprised. But let's check in again after seven minutes of this and this time, uh, let's just do dyads for everybody, including me.

So just. Put me in a diet, if you would, this

after having done an exercise. If it, if you do feel good after having done it, you can share merit and that magnifies it. So what I like to say is, to the extent that I feel good, may all beings feel as good as I feel now.

I just watched a YouTube video of a, of a master piano teacher explaining how you should end a slow saw.

He said What you don't want to do is Take your hands off the keys and look around because the mood that you created with the song is still in play and you don't wanna break that mood so abruptly. So instead, and he demonstrates this, you, you, you leave all the keys down that you've been, that you've just played.

You press, you put your feet on the sustained pedal. I think actually I think you said press all three pedals. I dunno. But in any case the same sustained pedal is on so that even once you do lift your hands the tone will continue to ring throughout the roof and you very gently lift your fingers just until you're off the keys.

But nobody should see you doing this. Very subtle, not changing the. And the pedals are still down so that music is still ringing and you just sit there patiently and let that mood swell.

Are there any questions or comments about The 1-5-7 Technique and

Philip? Yes. My, my question is, uh, can I be in several realms at the same time?

That's a really cool question. I don't think there's any definitive answer. But we wanna look at why are we doing it in the first place. You could look at it in terms of what I call the clean model and the fuzzy model. The clean model says no. If you're born in one realm, you're just in it.

And that's actually quite useful for the purposes of the exercise because then we don't spend a lot of time worrying about that. We just get a feel for it. I'm, if I'm suffering, I'm in one of the lower realms. If it's a version, it's Hell. It doesn't just go with it. The fuzzy model allows for more nuance.

There. You can mix and match but another way to model that would be to say, well, if you're experiencing If it's not clear, if you haven't yet committed to one of the realms, maybe you're just not yet born, you're in the bardo between lifetimes I'm born. That's a way to model that, which would turn out to be really valuable skill to be able to stay in the bardo in travel as the BofA to all of the realms.

To do your bok mission would be cool. And there's one further r One of the reasons it's sometimes hard for people to evaluate which realm they're in is because you can almost always make a case that you're a Human. After all, you're, you're born, you're named as a Human, you have a birthdate. But for our purposes even though the Human realm is the broadest, uh, allows for the most possibilities.

We don't want to too easily accept that we're Humans. We want to aspire to being Humans because I would submit that much of your day, like mine does not rise to the level of Human in this system. And that in fact, we're going around as Hell beings trying to get rid of what we have. We're going around as hungry goats trying to get something we don't have.

We're going around dull, reactive, lethargic like Animals, territorial. We're going around competing, having imaginary arguments in our minds, like a jealous God Titan. You should be so lucky as to be a Human. So let, let's aspire to hu to Humans. And so, the short answer, Philip, let's use a clean model here.

And just say, no, you're not a bunch of different things. Pick one. And, uh, and it will work to improve.

Okay. So remember where we started today? I said I wanted to show you my process of getting myself in a position to deliver the new material. And I am, I'm in that position now. I feel like this exercise was successful. So I want to talk about the six yogas of Naropa. And specifically this time I want to talk about breathing.

Last time, uh, last time I presented two weeks ago, I I taught Turo breathing is an important aspect of Turo and breathing. Serves as a proxy for moving the wind element around. So as, as you'll recall, or if this is new material, it either was good, but we're taking the wind element into the, the two side channels and we're, we're redirecting it into the central channel.

And that is such a convenient, that's so conveniently lines up with the fact that we have a left and a right lung. That, that this can't be a coincidence and then we're going to make good use of it. Okay. What if you say that when I breathe in to my right nostril, I'm bringing the I'm bringing the wind element into the body and it's going into one of the subsidiary channels and I.

I'm not clear on whether that crosses over or goes straight down. I don't think we need to worry about that for now.

If I breathe into the right nostril and out, I'm filling one of those subsidiary channels and then I'm just breathing it right back out. Now what if I swap? Well, I'm filling the other one. Whether it crosses over or whether it just goes from left nostril to left. Lung, let's just say each nostril is assigned to one of the lungs and they feel different to me

when I breathe the wind energy into the left nostril and out the right. I'm puffing up or inflating the left side and deflating the right. Because remember, the wind elements function. One of its functions is to inflate stuff, to give it rigidity, to stiffen it up. So if I inflate the left, deflate the right to me, that's ex associated with this sambo, that's going to happen spontaneously.

When I am in a meditative state or traveling or immersed in another realm it that will happen anyway. I'll notice that or I can cultivate that. But if I say I want to maybe just because it feels int intuitive, I need to puff up the left side and deflate the right. Well do this with me, then let's just breathe in. You can use any finger. Whatever you want to include the nostril, but close the right nostril, breathe into the left, and then reverse that on the ex explanation.

If you do three rounds of that,

this is where the, uh, the art part of this comes in. More of an art and less of a science. It's like being a musician because you're going to have to monitor what's happening and know how to reproduce it. Let's do the ab comparison. So we breathe into the left and out the right. Now let's curve it around into the right and out the left three times.

I submit that if you do this a lot, you will develop a feel for what these things do, what does it do when I breathe in to left or the right? And furthermore, you're going to, uh, I think you're going to start

Have an intuitive sense of what ought to happen. So if you look at how your breathing works, normally for all of us, it's very intuitive. You don't have to think about it. You know when to breathe and you do. You know when to breathe any, know when to breathe out, whether it should be a long or short breath.

It's all just happening. You can watch it happen. It's the same thing with, with pranayama. That's what we're doing. Here's pranayama. What if you just go with it, just flow with it. It's fine for us to do these very structured practices like in one osl at the other or any combination of any kind of breathing you want.

But what if you don't have to do it anymore? We wanted to also get to the point where we just can feel our way into it. So if I demonstrate that now, what does it look like?

I'm just fishing around for it. What feels right. Now try this with me. You can partially occlude the, the nostril. You can completely occlude it. You can partially occlude both and do whatever you want in any combination. Just follow the intuition.

Let's say that, that the the wind element and the ratio of left to right is what is causing the physical body to manifest in the Human realm.

And look how that dovetails with our Turo exercise, where we divert the energy into the central channel while we're completely deflating both of the side channels and opening the airlock into space and spacing, all that atmosphere, all that wind element.

Well, when that happens, you're not instantiating in the Human body. When that happens, done properly, you're in the bardo unborn. You can access Dharia this way.

Now, a simplistic version of this might say, well, what's the best thing to do? We should, should we always try to be in the of not necessarily. There might be very good reasons why you want to manifest in him in realm. So you can take care of your family and go to work and pay the bills or do what you gotta do.

You, you have to manifest, manifest in a Human body. So we're not making an enemy out of the inflation property of the wind element. We're just pointing out there different ways to do it and some different ways to use the weird element to manifest a different configuration, a different ratio would help you manifest in a hail realm or an Animal realm, et cetera.

So think of all the different realms you can be in and all the shapes you can be in within any your realm as the mechanism for that is precisely the wind element and the ratio of the configuration. And then we have this third option. So let's go tot in Turo. I'm going to, Deflate both the side channels and make everything go into the central channel.

So here's a quick review of the basic breathing exercise we learned a couple of weeks ago. You breathe in normally inflating both the left and right channels with wind element, and then you divert that at the naval chakra into the central channel. All that wind goes like through little soda straws into the central channel.

And as a, as a helper to divert that energy and keep us on task on the isolation, you do just a partial root lock and very gentle contraction of the muscles around the perineum while visualizing, redirecting the wind.

We're going to take a five minute bio break and reassembled here at the top of the hour. So during the bio break, just like the piano player, don't break the mood. See if you can take your, your breathing into the break and meet back here with Turo in Inma, Stephen. Five.

Are there any questions about pranayama? Ormo. For how they fit into the six yogas of nipa. Any questions?

I think Pranayama is, uh, is under taught Underemphasized in, in Dharma nowadays. It turns out that you can achieve all kinds of altered states. Just by breathing. And, and I, on some level, I guess I won't be as surprised because we know that you can, there are various modalities for having absolutely bonkers mind states via special kinds of breathing.

But what I'm suggesting here is that you don't need anybody else to do it. You can't you can also just plug yourself in to your pana feedback loop, put yourself in the state. And if the state that you end up in, or the realm and shape that you end up in is due to various configurations of the wind element among other things well that certainly seems relevant to our project because we're going to want to be able to travel Among the possible destinations.

And some of us also just really value altered states for their own sake. And this is a good way to get to altered states. There's one, there's a, a kind of a weird inertia that's seems to be built into how we are, that we, um, it's hard to make the first move. It's hard to say. Well, I, I, you know, I think I, I, the experience shows me that I actually could modify my state for the better if I were just to do some breathing.

But I don't want to, I feel this inertia and just stay here and not do any practice. Uh, and so I, in fact, I would say that that's one of the benefits of a group like this, that we all get together and reinforce each other's. Commitment to do it. So with that in mind let's do some more Ella together.

And what I'm looking for here is if anything happens. So remember Lama in introduction to tantra and the bliss of inner fire, he often says something will definitely happen if you do too. Now, for example, something will definitely happen. That's right and let's extend that to, to, uh, pma. Something will definitely happen.

Let's do it together for a few minutes, just silently and see if something does happen. And if it does happen, share it with the group.

Will someone volunteer to give us a window into your experience? Did anything happen and if so, what happened?

I can say that I feel refreshed, more alert, and more vibrant. Okay. Seems like a success.

It worked for me too. I found, I didn't anticipate this, but I found that I, for almost the entire time, I just breathed in outta my right nostril. I don't know why, but it felt like the right thing to do. Some other time it would be something else. My mind wandered in and out, but at moments I got really focused and delightfully.

So,

Peter, did you raise your hand?

I did not, but I intended to. Oh. Uh, SLA also raised his guys. It's so, Peter, can I come back to you? Yes. It was like a little bit like falling asleep up at the same time staying alert. So it was like relaxing but not getting like scattered. It was very interesting and at one point it was even like being like half of the mind or something being like very calm and the other part or even, or the body maybe being like agitated, like heartbeat and stuff.

So it was changing also. But pleasant generally. That's interesting too because if we're, we're talking in terms of Hals of one half of the mind is associated with one, one of the, uh, channels. You can have split phenomena like that, I suppose.

Okay. Peter? Yes. Similar to Lisa, I noticed being more alert even though I was expecting the opposite, given sort of lack of sleep last night. So that was pleasant. And then I had also a question. The question for me was, was just from a practical level as someone who works with athletes who very much liked to be in an altered state or in a state different than, say, being anxious prior to competition my understanding of mindfulness always was one of the benefits of it is just to be open to whatever is present, so to speak, and not to deliberately alter states.

As much as I enjoyed the practice I'm not quite sure how to wrap my head around this idea of, of this, this desiring to alter the state I'm in, so to speak. Good. Okay. When you're doing the kind of practice where you just want to be mindful of what's happening you don't attempt to change anything.

And in fact, the things you don't like about it are the object of the meditation, as you know. But there are two basic kinds of meditation. Let's call it type A and type B, type A meditation has an agenda. So let's say for example, your you sit down to follow the breath with the intention of entering Jonna.

You have a very specific goal there. Type B is arguably what the Buddha discovered under the Boaty tree. Or at least he, that's why we know about it because he discovered it and told us about it. And so that's mindfulness. Type B meditation is, it has no agenda other than to notice what's going on and to be alert to it.

So, but we're not going to make those the enemy of each other. Because type B meditation exists and it's valuable, that doesn't mean we don't still practice type A. And so in Type A, what we're doing with pranayama could be either one, but if you go into it saying, I'm going to do these breathing exercises with the intention of upgrading my state, maybe being reborn in a higher state, well, that would be very consistent with early Buddhist themes.

After all, because as you know, according to the 10 Federers model, if you were to become a stream mentor, you would never again be reborn in the lower realms. That's pretty classic Buddhist doctrine, so I think we can safely infer from that. Wait a minute, they want me to become a stream mentor, and finally in our hot or a Buddha, they're telling me to get outta the lower realm.

All right, so let's not make the mistake of thinking that we shouldn't try to manipulate the situation. We, frankly should, at least according to Buddhism, just pick your spots. Now, I would submit Peter, and I would love to hear what your athletes say about this, but if some of them do gain some level of skill, or dare I say mastery to be able to put them to, to be able to coax themselves into better states than the one they're in, I think they will be very grateful to you for having taught them that.

Yes. Um, and that's a bit, a little bit where sometimes the dilemma might lie. So, so I don't know. I dunno how much time I want to take up here. Uh, but. When, when you are an athlete at Olympic Games where the outcome seems to, you know, mean the world to you, but the outcome is, uh, un uncertain almost by definition unpleasant mind states will arise.

And then there's this, you know, strong desire to make those unpleasant mind states go away because you are sort of caught in this thinking that if unpleasant mind states are present I can't perform. But the truth be told is, is, is the mind state doesn't really determine the performance. What determines the performance is the ability to focus on the task at hand.

So in a way, the alter state, state perhaps is to be okay with what is present and then, um, to, to pay attention to what needs to pay attention to, uh, which again is the task at hand. So, so what the trap lies for my athletes is, is, is thinking that, that they need to change how they feel as opposed to they need to change what they put their attention.

I see. That's well put. And

that makes me think you're on the right track. You're emphasizing the kind of meditation that allows you to be with what is as opposed to hankering after something that isn't. Yes. And so that would be situational. Yes. Depending on who and what they're. What they're working on or training for. You can choose meditative techniques that support that.

Yes.

Okay. And Diane,

well, here goes, thank you for offering a meditation on breathing. I watched my friend die last week of lung cancer and he couldn't breathe. And I ended up with pneumonia currently. So breathing is a go-to in meditation, um, for me. So I felt the inertia you spoke about, I can't breathe, can't do this, don't wanna get out of my.

Poor little pneumonia state with great compassion. But I did it. So I noticed three things. One was the road to sleepiness. It was like a, a tunnel and I could choose not to because there was momentum overpowering the inertia. With each exhale there was a kind of shedding like when you go to museum and you can give them your umbrella and rain hat and raincoat and shopping bags.

There was a shadow so then I could enter the museum and it was, it's some kind of museum of rhythm.

This vast

unescapable TikTok of Human breathing, which I watched stopped last week, which I'm struggling to hold onto, but the, the kind of, not, the tuck wasn't breathing. It was like, it was like a model

of some vast harmony.

Beautiful.

I wonder what happens subjectively to the person who stops breathing. My, my hunch is that they continue to have some kind of an experience, although it looks to me as though they have, uh, shuffled off the mortal coil.

I'm pretty sure they just keep going. I, I heard a cute analogy where if you imagine that you're playing a, a live action role playing game down on the beach with all your friends, and suddenly let's say you're, you're wearing costumes and suddenly you look over and, and your friend. Your friend's costume just collapses into a heap on the beach and you think, oh my God, he's dead.

She's dead. And then you get a text from him or her and they say, oh, it's lunchtime. I'm my mom just prepared dinner, and they're not dead. But they, they look to you like that to you because they abandoned their avatar within the game, and I think that's pretty sweet.

What also comes to mind here is because death is such an important theme,

if when I die, my subjective experience does just turn off like a light I won't notice. So although everyone left behind Will, will be left with the grieving and the pain, I myself will be fine. This is how when I think it through, this is what I come to my conclusion. So it's kinda like we can't lose either.

I completely turn off like a light and I don't know about it and don't complain. Or I, I get to continue with my subjective experience in some other form.

Insurance hurt when somebody dies.

Alright, I want to introduce just the beginning, just a teaser for the Elusory body practice, which is the second of the six yogas of Naropa. So I'm going to try the plan game here to illustrate, get my props ready.

Yeah, so I'm holding up my phone with my two hands and my two physical hands. But I'm going to reach, let's see, little physical hands, a little floppy. Okay. Got my two hands here, but I'm going to reach with my astral hand and encounter the phone. All right? So that's, that's the demonstration. But in fact, when I do it, it looks like this, I am holding the phone in my two hands, and I'm going to reach with an imaginary appendage and touch the phone.

So I'd like you to do that. If you have something, even if you can just reach out, touch the sides of your laptop. But if you have a phone, that's fine. Just occupy your two physical hands while you reach with your a third. Astral appendage and touch the phone. And what does it feel like with that third hand

notice? What if you compare and contrast the astral hand with the physical hands, they have their, they have different ways of being. The astral hand is infinitely extensible. You could reach up and touch the moon. It's cold, hard, dusty surface,

and then pull it back and touch the phone. You can use your astrol hand to encounter the surface of the phone and feel the hardness, the smoothness of it. But you can also pass an astrol hand right through the phone,

and you get to choose.

You have an elusory body that is often more or less associated in space and shape with your physical body, but it's not tethered to it. So you can take your astral body out and fly it like a kite on the string overhead.

You can noticing now that you have two bodies, you have the physical body down here holding onto the string and the astrol body flying overhead, you can change the ratio. Ratio of investment.

Much of the time, our ratio, our investment is a hundred percent in the physical body. We don't even notice that we have a astrol body. But what about dreams? When you're asleep at night and dreaming, you forget that there's a body sleeping on the bed. You're just fully invested. A hundred percent invested in the astro body, the dream body.

It's not binary though, so you can change that racial. What if it's 50 50? I'm flying my kite overhead and I'm aware that I'm sitting down here in a physical body. And as I, as I kind of go back and forth in ways with the investment, identifying now as the kite, I can feel it flying. I'm flying. I can feel the sensations in my body, the g forces of acceleration and banking.

I can put most of my investment overhead. And walk the downstairs body like a dog with the kite string as the leash.

So this astrol body this elusory body the second yoga of Naropa, is going to be important in all kinds of practices that we can do

over, over this next week. If you were to practice experimenting with the astro body, using the exercises that we just did and, and whichever others you invent, that would be time well spent. And now with just under three minutes to go. Any last questions about any of it?

I have a question about the realms. It keeps like coming back, uh, since my background is in, uh, Teva. Yeah. Are they somehow related or can they be related because they obviously can be to the stages of insight or to the typical like conditions like, you know, like fear and equanimity and all this.

There certainly are relationships. I wouldn't map those. I don't think they conveniently map one to one on onto the stage of insight, but certainly some of those attributes, um, line up. For example, if you look at the three, uh, at the bottom of the clock, the three that are down there are greed, hatred, and delusion.

Hungry Ghost Hell and Animal. So the three poisons map on very nicely to the, to those three lower realms the attribute of equanimity, which you mentioned is most likely found in the Human realm. That's what I mean when we say that we have, when I say we have this broad purview as Humans, to be able to notice the whole spectrum of good and bad stuff and find mindfulness and equanimity within that, gods don't do that.

Gods don't need that. They just never have a bad day. It's easy to be a economists when, when it feels good to be you. Hell beings don't have that. Hell beings just always have a bad day. They have no equanimity whatsoever in reverse. So Humans are uniquely theists.

Okay. That is a wrap. Thanks for coming everybody, and we'll see you in a week.